
- Rules for a Complex Quantum World

  In quantum information science, all three elements of Schumacher's list take on new richness. What novel physical resources are available in quantum mechanics? What information-processing tasks can we hope to perform? What are appropriate criteria for success? The resources now include superposition states, like the idealized alive and dead cat of Schrödinger. The processes can involve manipulations of entanglement (mysterious quantum correlations) between widely separated objects. The criteria of success become more subtle than in the classical case, because to extract the result of a quantum information-processing task we must observe, or measure, the system--which almost inevitably changes it, destroying the special superposition states that are unique to quantum physics.  Qubits Quantum information science begins by generalizing the fundamental resource of classical information--bits--to quantum bits, or qubits. Just as bits are ideal objects abstracted from the principles of classical physics, qubits are ideal quantum objects abstracted from the principles of quantum mechanics. Bits can be represented by magnetic regions on disks, voltages in circuitry, or graphite marks made by a pencil on paper. The functioning of these classical physical states as bits does not depend on the details of how they are realized. Similarly, the properties of a qubit are independent of its specific physical representation as the spin of an atomic nucleus, say, or the polarization of a photon of light.

  In quantum information science, all three elements of Schumacher's list take on new richness. What novel physical resources are available in quantum mechanics? What information-processing tasks can we hope to perform? What are appropriate criteria for success? The resources now include superposition states, like the idealized alive and dead cat of Schrödinger. The processes can involve manipulations of entanglement (mysterious quantum correlations) between widely separated objects. The criteria of success become more subtle than in the classical case, because to extract the result of a quantum information-processing task we must observe, or measure, the system--which almost inevitably changes it, destroying the special superposition states that are unique to quantum physics.  Qubits Quantum information science begins by generalizing the fundamental resource of classical information--bits--to quantum bits, or qubits. Just as bits are ideal objects abstracted from the principles of classical physics, qubits are ideal quantum objects abstracted from the principles of quantum mechanics. Bits can be represented by magnetic regions on disks, voltages in circuitry, or graphite marks made by a pencil on paper. The functioning of these classical physical states as bits does not depend on the details of how they are realized. Similarly, the properties of a qubit are independent of its specific physical representation as the spin of an atomic nucleus, say, or the polarization of a photon of light.

  A bit is described by its state, 0 or 1. Likewise, a qubit is described by its quantum state. Two possible quantum states for a qubit correspond to the 0 and 1 of a classical bit. In quantum mechanics, however, any object that has two different states necessarily has a range of other possible states, called superpositions, which entail both states to varying degrees. The allowed states of a qubit are precisely all those states that must be available, in principle, to a classical bit that is transplanted into a quantum world. Qubit states correspond to points on the surface of a sphere, with the 0 and 1 being the south and north poles [see box </article.cfm?articleID=00019C9B-245E-1D9B-815A809EC5880000>]. The continuum of states between 0 and 1 fosters many of the extraordinary properties of quantum information.


  How much classical information can we store in a qubit? One line of reasoning suggests the amount is infinite: To specify a quantum state we need to specify the latitude and longitude of the corresponding point on the sphere, and in principle each may be given to arbitrary precision. These numbers can encode a long string of bits. For example, 011101101... could be encoded as a state with latitude 01 degrees, 11 minutes and 01.101... seconds.  This reasoning, though plausible, is incorrect. One can encode an infinite amount of classical information in a single qubit, but one can never retrieve that information from the qubit. The simplest attempt to read the qubit's state, a standard direct measurement of it, will give a result of either 0 or 1, south pole or north pole, with the probability of each outcome determined by the latitude of the original state. You could have chosen a different measurement, perhaps using the "Melbourne-Azores Islands" axis instead of north-south, but again only one bit of information would have been extracted, albeit one governed by probabilities with a different dependence on the state's latitude and longitude. Whichever measurement you choose erases all the information in the qubit except for the single bit that the measurement uncovers.  The principles of quantum mechanics prevent us from ever extracting more than a single bit of information, no matter how cleverly we encode the qubit or how ingeniously we measure it afterward. This surprising result was proved in 1973 by Alexander S. Holevo of the Steklov Mathematical Institute in Moscow, following a 1964 conjecture by J. P. Gordon of AT&T Bell Laboratories. It is as though the qubit contains hidden information that we can manipulate but not access directly. A better viewpoint, however, is to regard this hidden information as being a unit of quantum information rather than an infinite number of inaccessible classical bits.

  - Notice how this example follows Schumacher's paradigm for information science. Gordon and Holevo asked how many qubits (the physical resource) are required to store a given amount of classical information (the task) in such a way that the information can be reliably recovered (the criterion for success). Furthermore, to answer this question, they introduced a mathematical concept, now known as the Holevo chi (represented by the Greek letter chi), that has since been used to simplify the analysis of more complex phenomena, similar to the simplifications enabled by Shannon's entropy. For example, Michal Horodecki of the University of Gdansk in Poland has shown that the Holevo chi can be used to analyze the problem of compressing quantum states produced by a quantum information source, which is analogous to the classical data compression considered by Shannon.

- Entangled States

  Single qubits are interesting, but more fascinating behavior arises when several qubits are brought together. A key feature of quantum information science is the understanding that groups of two or more quantum objects can have states that are entangled. These entangled states have properties fundamentally unlike anything in classical physics and are coming to be thought of as an essentially new type of physical resource that can be used to perform interesting tasks.

  Schrödinger was so impressed by entanglement that in a seminal 1935 paper (the same year that he introduced his cat to the world) he called it "not one but rather the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics, the one that enforces its entire departure from classical lines of thought." The members of an entangled collection of objects do not have their own individual quantum states. Only the group as a whole has a well-defined state [see box </article.cfm?articleID=0006EAFF-2AD4-1D9B-815A809EC5880000>]. This phenomenon is much more peculiar than a superposition state of a single particle. Such a particle does have a well-defined quantum state even though that state may superpose different classical states.

- Entangled quantum systems behave in ways impossible in any classical world.

  Entangled objects behave as if they were connected with one another no matter how far apart they are--distance does not attenuate entanglement in the slightest. If something is entangled with other objects, a measurement of it simultaneously provides information about its partners. It is easy to be misled into thinking that one could use entanglement to send signals faster than the speed of light, in violation of Einstein's special relativity, but the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics stymies such efforts.

  Despite its strangeness, for a long time entanglement was regarded as a curiosity and was mostly ignored by physicists. This changed in the 1960s, when John S. Bell of CERN, the European laboratory for particle physics near Geneva, predicted that entangled quantum states allow crucial experimental tests that distinguish between quantum mechanics and classical physics. Bell predicted, and experimenters have confirmed, that entangled quantum systems exhibit behavior that is impossible in a classical world--impossible even if one could change the laws of physics to try to emulate the quantum predictions within a classical framework of any sort! Entanglement represents such an essentially novel feature of our world that even experts find it very difficult to think about. Although one can use the mathematics of quantum theory to reason about entanglement, as soon as one falls back on analogies, there is a great danger that the classical basis of our analogies will mislead us.

  In the early 1990s the idea that entanglement falls wholly outside the scope of classical physics prompted researchers to ask whether entanglement might be useful as a resource for solving information-processing problems in new ways. The answer was yes. The flood of examples began in 1991, when Artur K. Ekert of the University of Cambridge showed how to use entanglement to distribute cryptographic keys impervious to eavesdropping. In 1992 Charles H. Bennett of IBM and Stephen Wiesner of Tel Aviv University showed that entanglement can assist the sending of classical information from one location to another (a process called superdense coding, in which two bits are transferred on a particle that seems to have room to carry only one). In 1993 an international team of six collaborators explained how to teleport a quantum state from one location to another using entanglement. An explosion of further applications followed.

  - Weighing Entanglement

  As with individual qubits, which can be represented by many different physical objects, entanglement also has properties independent of its physical representation. For practical purposes, it may be more convenient to work with one system or another, but in principle it does not matter. For example, one could perform quantum cryptography with an entangled photon pair or an entangled pair of atomic nuclei or even a photon and a nucleus entangled together.

  Representation independence suggests a thought-provoking analogy between entanglement and energy. Energy obeys the laws of thermodynamics regardless of whether it is chemical energy, nuclear energy or any other form. Could a general theory of entanglement be developed along similar lines to the laws of thermodynamics?

  This hope was greatly bolstered in the second half of the 1990s, when researchers showed that different forms of entanglement are qualitatively equivalent--the entanglement of one state could be transferred to another, similar to energy flowing from, say, a battery charger to a battery. Building on these qualitative relations, researchers have begun introducing quantitative measures of entanglement. These developments are ongoing, and researchers have not yet agreed as to the best way of quantifying entanglement. The most successful scheme thus far is based on the notion of a standard unit of entanglement, akin to a standard unit of mass or energy [see box </article.cfm?articleID=0006EAFF-2AD4-1D9B-815A809EC5880000>].

  This approach works analogously to measuring masses by using a balance. The mass of an object is defined by how many copies of the standard mass are needed to balance it on a set of scales. Quantum information scientists have developed a theoretical "entanglement balance" to compare the entanglement in two different states. The amount of entanglement in a state is defined by seeing how many copies of some fixed standard unit of entanglement are needed to balance it. Notice that this method of quantifying entanglement is another example of the fundamental question of information science. We have identified a physical resource (copies of our entangled state) and a task with a criterion for success. We define our measure of entanglement by asking how much of our physical resource we need to do our task successfully.

  The quantitative measures of entanglement developed by following this program are proving enormously useful as unifying concepts in the description of a wide range of phenomena. Entanglement measures improve how researchers can analyze tasks such as quantum teleportation and algorithms on quantum-mechanical computers. The analogy with energy helps again: to understand processes such as chemical reactions or the operation of an engine, we study the flow of energy between different parts of the system and determine how the energy must be constrained at various locations and times. In a similar way, we can analyze the flow of entanglement from one subsystem to another required to perform a quantum information-processing task and so obtain constraints on the resources needed to perform the task.

  The development of the theory of entanglement is an example of a bottom-up approach--starting from simple questions about balancing entanglement, we gradually gain insight into more complex phenomena. In contrast, in a few cases, people have divined extremely complex phenomena through a great leap of insight, allowing quantum information science to proceed from the top down. The most celebrated example is an algorithm for quickly finding the prime factors of a composite integer on a quantum computer, formulated in 1994 by Peter W. Shor of AT&T Bell Labs. On a classical computer, the best algorithms known take exponentially more resources to factor larger numbers. A 500-digit number needs 100 million times as many computational steps as a 250-digit number. The cost of Shor's algorithm rises only polynomially--a 500-digit number takes only eight times as many steps as a 250-digit number.

  Shor's algorithm is a further example of the basic paradigm (how much computational time is needed to find the factors of an n-bit integer?), but the algorithm appears isolated from most other results of quantum information science [see box </article.cfm?articleID=0001EB7D-28B0-1D9B-815A809EC5880000>]. At first glance, it looks like merely a clever programming trick with little fundamental significance. That appearance is deceptive; researchers have shown that Shor's algorithm can be interpreted as an instance of a procedure for determining the energy levels of a quantum system, a process that is more obviously fundamental. As time goes on and we fill in more of the map, it should become easier to grasp the principles underlying Shor's and other quantum algorithms and, one hopes, to develop new algorithms.

One final application, quantum error correction, provides the best evidence to date that quantum information science is a useful framework for studying the world. Quantum states are delicate, easily destroyed by stray interactions, or noise, so schemes to counteract these disturbances are essential.

  Classical computation and communications have a well-developed assortment of error-correcting codes to protect information against the depredations of noise. A simple example is the repetition code [see box </article.cfm?articleID=000BD5F8-4369-1D9B-815A809EC5880000>]. This scheme represents the bit 0 as a string of three bits, 000, and the bit 1 as a string of three bits, 111. If the noise is relatively weak, it may sometimes flip one of the bits in a triplet, changing, for instance, 000 to 010, but it will flip two bits in a triplet far less often. Whenever we encounter 010 (or 100 or 001), we can be almost certain the correct value is 000, or 0. More complex generalizations of this idea provide very good error-correcting codes to protect classical information.

- Quantum Error Correction

Initially it appeared to be impossible to develop codes for quantum error correction because quantum mechanics forbids us from learning with certainty the unknown state of a quantum object--the obstacle, again, of trying to extract more than one bit from a qubit. The simple classical triplet code therefore fails because one cannot examine each copy of a qubit and see that one copy must be discarded without ruining each and every copy in the process. Worse still, making the copies in the first place is nontrivial: quantum mechanics forbids taking an unknown qubit and reliably making a duplicate, a result known as the no-cloning theorem.

- Quantum error correction might improve the precision of the world's best clocks.

The situation looked bleak in the mid-1990s, when prominent physicists such as the late Rolf Landauer of IBM wrote skeptical articles pointing out that quantum error correction would be necessary for quantum computation but that the standard classical techniques could not be used in the quantum world. The field owes a great debt to Landauer's skepticism for pointing out problems of this type that had to be overcome [see "Riding the Back of Electrons," by Gary Stix; Profile, Scientific American, September 1998].
Happily, clever ideas developed independently by Shor and Andrew M. Steane of the University of Oxford in 1995 showed how to do quantum error correction without ever learning the states of the qubits or needing to clone them. As with the triplet code, each value is represented by a set of qubits. These qubits are passed through a circuit (the quantum analogue of logic gates) that will successfully fix an error in any one of the qubits without actually "reading" what all the individual states are. It is as if one ran the triplet 010 through a circuit that could spot that the middle bit was different and flip it, all without determining the identity of any of the three bits.
Quantum error-correcting codes are a triumph of science. Something that brilliant people thought could not be done--protecting quantum states against the effects of noise--was accomplished using a combination of concepts from information science and basic quantum mechanics. These techniques have now received preliminary confirmation in experiments conducted at Los Alamos National Laboratory, IBM and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and more extensive experiments are planned.

Quantum error correction has also stimulated many exciting new ideas. For example, the world's best clocks are currently limited by quantum-mechanical noise; researchers are asking whether the precision of those clocks can be improved by using quantum error correction. Another idea, proposed by Alexei Kitaev of the California Institute of Technology, is that some physical systems might possess a type of natural noise tolerance. Those systems would in effect use quantum error correction without human intervention and might show extraordinary inherent resilience against decoherence.

  We have explored how quantum information science progresses from fundamental questions to build up an understanding of more complex systems. What does the future hold? By following Schumacher's program, we will surely obtain novel insights into the information-processing capabilities of the universe. Perhaps the methods of quantum information science will even yield insights into systems not traditionally thought of as information-processing systems. For instance, condensed matter exhibits complex phenomena such as high-temperature superconductivity and the fractional quantum Hall effect. Quantum properties such as entanglement are involved, but their role is currently unclear. By applying what we have learned from quantum information science, we may greatly enhance our skills in the ongoing chess match with the complex quantum universe.

  Michael A. Nielsen is an associate professor in the department of physics at the University of Queensland in Brisbane, Australia. Born in Brisbane, he received his Ph.D. in physics as a Fulbright Scholar at the University of New Mexico in 1998. He is the author, with Isaac L. Chuang of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, of the first comprehensive graduate-level textbook on quantum information science, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information.

---

- Semi-Automatic Domain Decomposition Based on Potential Theory
Authors: Spekreijse, S. P.; Kok, J. C.; NATIONAL AEROSPACE LAB AMSTERDAM (NETHERLANDS)

  Abstract: Decomposition of a flow domain into blocks, so-called domain decomposition, is the most challenging task in the process of multi-block grid generation. In this paper, a method is described to facilitate the construction of the blocks in exterior flow domains. Layers of blocks are automatically generated by solving the Laplace equation in a region between the configuration surface and a bounding box surface. A boundary element method based on simple- source distributions is used to solve the Laplace equation. After solving the Laplace equation, starting with a face decomposition of the configuration surface, blocks are generated by marching along the electrostatic field lines until a user specified potential is reached. The process may be repeated to generate a second layer of blocks. However, for configurations with a strongly non-convex shape, some blocks may need to be added manually to prevent deterioration of the block shapes in the second-layer. Therefore, the method is called semi-automatic

---

- Computing Nonlinear Thermodynamics in Shape Memory Alloy Wires <Slides/Reynolds.pdf>

Daniel R. Reynolds
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

  In this talk I present a mesoscale mathematical model for the behavior of shape memory alloy wires. These so-called 'smart materials' are characterized by a unique ability to macroscopically transform their shape as a result of changes in temperature. The model consists of continuum-level conservation equations for the thermal and elastic properties, based on a new construction of the Helmholtz free energy potential. This system is paired with a computational solution technique that integrates a viscosity-based continuation method with an implicit Newton-Krylov solver, allowing for an efficient and robust solution to the non-convex modeling system. Computational experiments document that this combination of modeling and solution techniques appropriately predicts the thermally -and stress- induced martensitic transformations, hysteretic behavior, as well as the nonlinear thermal properties associated with shape memory alloys.